OCOM5204M: Data mining and text analytics 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
1 of 10 
Data mining and text analytics online 
communities and applications 
Professor Eric Atwell: Hello. This is Eric Atwell. In this lecture, I'm going to tell you a bit about 
data mining and text analytics online communities and resources. Sort of social media, but 
specifically for data mining and text analytics professionals. As an AI expert, you certainly will be 
by the end of your course, you can join these "social media" communities for data mining text 
analytics professionals to "network", to meet others, to share knowledge and resources. 
We don't have to wait till the end of your course because you can join now. And it's particularly 
useful if you're trying to think of a research project topic and get some ideas by looking at others 
who have developed text analytics applied research projects. And in your proposal for a project, 
you might want to think about other related work as part of your background. 
First we're going to quickly look at some general social media because they do have AI groups 
and networks, for example, Facebook, LinkedIn, Quora. And I won't go into a lot of detail because 
I'm sure you know these yourself. But there are also other communities which were explicitly set 
up by academics or practitioners in the AI field or the natural language processing field to share 
knowledge, ask questions, and find resources. 
And we're going to look at some examples, KDnuggets, Kaggle, WEKA, ICAME, ACL, SemEval, 
and the EI-JRC communities. These are just examples, there are others as well. But just to give 
you a flavor of things you might not realise that you should try looking at. 
So the first thing, obviously, is Facebook and other-- what we would call social media. So if you 
Google Facebook-- I'm not going to go to Facebook to have a look. You can try this yourself. But 
it's now recently-- the name, the company name has changed to Meta, Meta Platforms, do 
business as Meta. Formerly known as Facebook, a multinational technology conglomerate based 
in California. Meta is the parent organization of Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp, and many other 
things. 
Now one reason for looking at Facebook within the context of text analytics is there are quite a few 
groups like artificial intelligence and deep learning or corpus linguistics where you can join, ask 
questions, and interact with users. Trouble is, it's open to all, including Facebook users who think 
this sounds like an interesting thing to join even though they don't actually know what they're 
talking about. 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
2 of 10 
However, as well as the standard Facebook, be aware there's also Facebook Research-- let's see 
if I can click on this and see what happens. So Facebook Research is a huge research lab. I don't 
want to look at this but you can see they have lots of examples of people who got their jobs at 
Facebook, publications, research papers. They even invite people to submit proposals. 
So if you've got a research proposal and it's good, you can send it off to Facebook and they may 
give you some money to actually implement it. I'm not suggesting all of the proposals you come up 
with are going to be that good but they do fund. Facebook basically makes a lot of money and they 
want to use it to public benefit and part of it is to fund research projects like this. Let's go back to 
the slide. What next? 
We want to look at LinkedIn. LinkedIn is a networking website, a bit like Facebook, for professional 
contacts. Things like if you're searching for a job or recruiting people. It's become more Facebook-
like in that now you can post ideas, news, or whatever. You can follow people and collect 
followers. You can get notifications sent to you. There's learning and training job adverts and 
obviously product adverts of various sorts. 
I tend to-- when anybody asks me can they link to me I just say yes. So I have accumulated about 
6,000 contacts in the AI and natural language processing field. And occasionally I can ask people 
for advice and so on. Just in case you haven't seen it before, here's LinkedIn. 
And this would probably take you directly to my LinkedIn page. Yes. You probably do want to see 
the details of this. But there's LinkedIn. There's lots of stuff. In particular, my network, jobs, 
messaging, notifications, work, and so on, and learning. They have some training, not a lot, but it's 
getting more. So there will be some training courses to do with natural language processing or text 
analytics. 
Next one. You have Quora. You wouldn't think of this as an AI site in particular. Quora is a 
question and answer website. If you have a question, you can post it, and then other people will 
answer it. Quora's a place to gain and share knowledge, a platform to ask questions and connect 
with people who contribute unique insights and quality answers. That means it can be better than 
just a Google search. 
If you have a technical AI or NLP question, like how can I avoid overfitting-- and let's see if I can 
go to Quora and see if that works. OK, well, there's other questions here. So basically, you type 
your question. 
Let's see. Can I try this? How can I avoid overfitting, question mark, and see what comes up. And 
it comes up with possible answers from authors. And this is more specific, more directly answering 
your question than if you just Google search it. And so it's useful for AI and machine learning that's 
useful for everything else too. 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
3 of 10 
OK. Let's get on to some specific ones in the area of AI and data mining. So one of the longest 
established websites in this area is KDnuggets, or short for "Knowledge Discovery nuggets." 
Knowledge discovery is about extracting useful knowledge from data. So it's what in the business 
school they might call data mining or machine learning. So it's a sort of fancy word for data mining 
because you're getting-- you're discovering knowledge rather than just getting data and patterns. 
And knowledge nugget is a small item or piece for useful information that's often used in business 
trainers' videos. It's not really a general English idiom. But the KDnuggets website has got news, 
tutorials, reviews, job adverts. It was originally an academic site and for academics but it's 
increasingly got lots of AI industry practitioners. 
And as you see you first thing you are invited to, "sign up for a newsletter." I have signed up. Now 
I get sent every week learning posts that people have put in blog pages essentially. How to get 
certified as a data scientist. There's quite a few quite technical stuff. For example, "2021: A Year 
Full of Amazing AI Papers- A Review." 
So this is a summary of the main findings in AI research papers this past year. That could be 
good. I would definitely sign up for KDnuggets newsletter. And a lot of it is adverts and stuff you 
don't want to read but there are nuggets of knowledge in there worth having. 
Another really useful website is Kaggle. Originally it was just competitions to do a machine 
learning, and then pretty soon people realised if you want a data set-- well, companies like Google 
started contributing big data sets for these competitions and giving big prizes for winning the 
competition because they realised that lots of enthusiasts would try to tackle their tasks and they 
might actually get some useful software and results out of this. And it's now been bought up by 
Google and if you go to the website you can use Kaggle, which is actually Google Cloud 
resources. 
It says, "Kaggle offers a no-setup customizable, Jupyter Notebooks environment. Access free 
GPUs and a huge repository of community published data and code." And some advertising from 
Google. And the nice thing also is that the competitions, once they're over, and somebody's won it 
or not-- not all of them have prizes but they're still fun to-- but afterwards, the data is archived. And 
very often, the discussions are archived, not just the results and who won, but how they got about 
how they developed it. 
Originally it was just enthusiasts. It's now increasingly taken over by industry sponsors and prizes, 
but it's still a lot of useful data sets that are available. If you go to Kaggle we'll see top 
competitions, data sets, code, discussions. That's really useful. If you've got a problem you can 
take it there. 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
4 of 10 
Let's just look at some of these data sets that they have on offer. Indian coin denomination data, 
heart disease mortality data set. It's got quite a few medical data sets of various sorts and also 
sports data sets. Health data sets. There's stuff to do with software trending, food, caffeine content 
of drinks data set, travel and so on. Lots there. 
So one thing you can do, if you're trying to think of a project that you might want to do, then maybe 
if you've got a Kaggle and find one set that are related to what you're doing, then you can include 
those in your background. Or the other way around, if you can't think of a project, go to Kaggle, 
find one that looks interesting and then think of a way of adapting it to your specific company or 
specific interests. And Kaggle has got lots of models to work from. So that's general enthusiasts. 
There's another sort of way of getting enthusiasts who have in common a piece of software. So 
quite a few platforms for AI. As well as having software you can download, there's also a website 
behind it. So for example, WEKA. We're going to look at the Waikato Environment for Knowledge 
Analysis. Originally set up at University of Waikato for their machine learning research group, it's 
grown and grown. 
It's now a hub for WEKA users where you can download software and get links to the textbook, 
because they've written a textbook to describe it for use in teaching. There's also other tutorials, 
video tutorials, and so on. Lots of people have contributed dataset to WEKA so you can get those 
too. 
It's just one example because there are other plenty of other software tools that you might want to 
use and they also have websites to go with them like sketch engine for example. But the Waikato 
website is much more open and community based because the company hasn't taken over. It's 
run by the enthusiasts only so it's not really trying to sell you stuff. 
If you go there, you'll see it doesn't look as flashy. There's not lots of graphics and pictures but the 
text is just the basic information about it. You can download the software. There's lots of 
documentation. Frequently asked questions, how to get further help, there's books and other 
papers, research projects, which have used WEKA for example. Lots of people involved so if you 
find that you want a specific question about a specific piece of software, you may even find the 
person who developed it and ask them directly. So that's WEKA. 
Another example of a network. So WEKA is a community of people around a particular piece of 
software or a particular platform. Another sort of reason for a community, a specialist community, 
would be people working on a very specific research niche. So ICAME is the International 
Computer Archive of Modern English. 
And this is very specifically for corpus linguistics researchers on English, and in particular for 
English language teaching, teaching English as a second language or a foreign language. So all 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
5 of 10 
around the world, English is an international language, but for many people, it's not their first 
language and they have to learn it as a second language, and possibly some of you students 
watching this. And they developed the first English text corpora. The Brown Corpus, the LOB 
Corpus, The International Corpus of English, and so on. 
One of my very first jobs after graduating was to work on the LOB, or Lancaster-Oslo-Bergen 
Corpus. A million words of British English to compare against the Brown Corpus, a million words of 
American English. And they hold an ICAME conference every year. It's the 43rd in 2022 so it's 
been going quite a long time. 
And if you look at some of the early ICAME conference photos, you may see me in there. I was at 
some of the original ones. Not 43 years ago, but nearly. And one of the very useful things they've 
had for quite a long time is the CORPORA mailing list. So again, if you go to the ICAME website, 
you'll see it's not particularly flashy, there's no images. This is typical of an academic thing. 
We just have links to their conferences and also link to the CORPORA mailing list where you can 
subscribe. And then once you join the mailing list, then they will send you emails. It tells you what 
you have to do is send an email to CORPORArequest@uib.no with the line "subscribe" and then 
and you get subscribed. So it's pretty basic compared to flashy industry web pages but it still 
works. And that's English corpus linguistics. 
A bit broader than that, and in fact, quite a bit broader, is the ACL, The Association for 
Computational Linguistics. This is a sort of professional body for computational linguistics, natural 
language processing, and text analytics for academics and also researchers. So people working at 
Facebook research labs will be in the ACL if they're working on text analytics, as well as University 
academics. 
All the industry research labs like Google, Microsoft, and so on, they present their research at ACL 
journals and conferences. So the computational linguistics journal publishes quite detailed 
research papers about particular research projects. They also run conferences and resources and 
they have an anthology of-- they also have lots of special interest groups. Computation linguistics 
is still quite a wide area. 
I already mentioned, if you remember maybe before, SIGWAC, The Special Interest Group on 
Web as Corpus, as a sort of people who might use something like sketch engine to collect the 
corpus and then analyze it. Or SIGSEM, we'll have a look at. They're the Special Interest Group In 
Semantic Analysis and words, in particular. Let's quickly go to the ACL website if that works. It's 
actually based in America. 
There is some industry interest. They publish a journal but you'll see it looks like an academic web 
page with lots of text on it. Yes, go back to here and I said yeah, they have a wiki. The wiki 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
6 of 10 
contains lots of information. For example, a list of journals in computational linguistics. That's all. 
There's a list of general AI journals not specific to linguistics. And then journals in cognitive 
science and psycho linguistics. And there are quite a long list of computational linguistics and 
natural language processing journals. 
So these will publish research papers which you might-- if you're looking for papers on a project in 
text analytics, this is where you might find them. There's also more specialised journals 
information retrieval-- that's Google search and things like that, which is a subset of computational 
linguistics. 
Then there's journals on linguistics, which is the theory behind computational linguistics. And these 
are not particularly computing at all, this is theoretical linguistics. And there's also a couple of 
journals on machine learning, which are not specific to computational linguistics or computing or 
text analytics, but have machine learning theory and models which might apply. 
And they also run conferences. So they have a web page listing upcoming events, including, for 
example, the 13th Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, known as LREC, in 
Marseilles, and it's happening in June 2022. So you've got the dates. 
You also have to know-- if you want to go to the conference, typically, you have to submit a paper. 
You don't have to, but they ask you to submit a research paper, maybe four to eight pages long, 
describing your research. And then the deadline for submission is often quite well before the 
actual workshop or conference. So the deadline on all these conferences, this one's in June 2022, 
but it's already too late to submit a paper to it because deadline's gone. So that's that. 
Oh and all of these conferences and journals and academic go and publish a 4 to 8 page paper in 
a journal might be longer. All of the papers since the beginning of time, well, since the beginning of 
the ACL, are collected together in this ACL anthology. So if we go back, you see 1989 and older. 
There's a 1974 computational linguistics paper. This is computation linguistics journal from 1974 
and you can read the PDFs from this. This is before PDFs existed so what had to be done is to 
scan the paper versions of these old journals and convert them into PDF that way. 
And just out of interest in the ACL anthology, let's try Atwell. I'm going to search for Atwell. See 
how many papers there are in there. Any search results? Oh, yes. Here's some interesting papers 
by Eric Atwell. Oh well I'll leave you to enjoy these at leisure So that's the ACL. 
And as I said, they have many special interest groups, a bit like ICAME is a specialised interest 
group for English language corpora and English language teaching. And another special interest 
group is Web As Corpus. Yet another one is Semantic Analysis. And these special interest groups 
can host their own conferences and workshops. 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
7 of 10 
So one you might want to look at is SemEval, or Semantic Evaluation. Every year they have 
papers in the journal-- sorry, in the workshop proceedings, but as well as having anybody who 
wants to can write a paper on their semantic research. They also have these things called shared 
tasks. It's essentially a competition, a bit like Kaggle, with a data set and a particular task, like 
build a classifier for detecting offensive language in tweets, for example. 
And they have a data set of tweets and they've had people have gone through and mark the ones 
which are offensive and ones which are not offensive. But as well as entering the competition, 
you're supposed to write an academic paper, 4 to 8 pages long, describing your methods, your 
experiments, and your results. 
And then the competition organisers select the best ones, the best paper that is, not necessarily 
the best results, but the best written papers with novel algorithms or methods. And these are 
invited at then present their work and there's usually-- the organisers write a sort of summary 
paper comparing all the different methods and results. 
So it's a bit like Cadwell but with academic research papers which you can cite. So again, if you're 
thinking of a research project, then have a look at SemEval to see if any of the tasks near the 
recent SemEvals are similar. And then you can cite these papers in your background. Or if you 
can't think of a research topic, look at the past SemEval competitions. Choose one of the tasks 
which looks interesting and see if you can modify it a bit to make it more relevant to your particular 
company or your job, or your interests. 
So that's because that way, you can then find-- if you look at the task and the proceedings of the 
workshop, you can find a range of papers describing different approaches and how good they 
were, the scores. You can then try the best ones, or some of them, on your task and you can also 
cite them as relevant background in your research proposal. 
And quite a few of these SemEval big data sets have been donated by Google or other 
companies, so they're really worthwhile data sets. And they've been made available for re-use 
such as the offensive language identification data set. 
So let's have a look at SemEval first. This is the current SemEval 2022 competition. There are 12 
tasks on a range of topics. And let's see what they have. For example, CODWOE, Comparing 
Dictionaries and WOrd Embeddings. We'll find out more what sort of word embeddings are. 
And there's also a social task like Patronizing and Condescending Language Detection. That 
sounds fun. Or Multimedia Automatic Misogyny Identification. Or Intended Sarcasm Detection in 
English and Arabic. See a lot of these are only for English but some of these competitions are 
multilingual for other language data sets. It's easy enough to collect English data sets, it maybe a 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
8 of 10 
bit harder to collect Arabic data sets or other languages. You can have a look at this yourself later 
on. 
And as I said, some of these data sets have been collected and documented quite in some detail. 
So here's the Offensive Language Identification Dataset from 2019. So the SemEval 2019 
competition proceedings have papers describing all the different contestants, how they did it, how 
they detected offensive language in the data set. So if you wanted to, you can read how other 
people did it. It was task six in the summer of 2019. 
And there's a paper by the organisers describing how the different competitors fared compared to 
each other, what algorithms was the best, and which were not so good. And you've got the data 
set you can download which, for each tweet or each social media post, is marked with offensive or 
not offensive. 
And if it is offensive, in addition, it's got marked is it a generic, horrible slur or is it actually targeted 
at something. And is it generally nasty or is it actually aimed at a particular target. And then if it's 
targeted, there's some further information about is it aimed at a group in general or some 
individual. So there's quite a lot of detailed information in there. That's just one example. 
Finally, as another sort of example of a specialised group, so we've seen that ICAME was 
basically a group of professors of core English corpus linguistics, got together and said, let's set up 
a website and ICAME and they did and it gradually grew. Another way is to have a group around a 
piece of software like WEKA. 
Another thing is, within ACL, various subgroups keep forming across a very large group of 
computational linguists and groups within them have formed subgroups or special interest groups. 
Another way of doing this is the European Union has been quite keen in fostering research in 
Europe. So the European Union has a Joint Research Center and they fund groups of researchers 
to set up communities. So the EU-JRC will fund projects, not so much to do research, but to foster 
EU collaboration. 
So as an example, the HUMAINT, H U M A I N T, project is on human behavior and machine 
intelligence. It involves a core team of researchers who have-- the grant is essentially do some 
research but also to set up a community of experts in cognitive science, machine learning, human 
capital interaction, and economies. European Union wants not just to foster research but actually 
make money out of it. 
So the project organises a series of scientific events. Here's their web page they run a winter 
school and workshops and other stuff. And because it's European Union there's always a 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
9 of 10 
European Union logo there. And you can find other communities here too. This is just one of them. 
You click on communities and you can search other communities. 
So that's examples. That's not everything here but just to keep you thinking. Hopefully, you're 
interested in artificial intelligence. You want to broaden your horizons. You're obviously learning 
but you want to become an expert. So you should join the network. Join these sort of quote, social 
media, unquote communities for data mining and text analytics for professionals. To talk to each 
other, to share knowledge, and also to gather knowledge. So if you want some knowledge and 
resources this is a good source. 
Particularly, if you're trying to think of an applied research project proposal idea, then go to some 
of these to get some ideas. Also, if you're developing a proposal, then you have to have a 
background section saying how you're building on other people's work. So again, go to these to 
find other people's work that's related. 
And there's this general social media like Facebook or LinkedIn or Quora where you can have 
specialist groups or you can ask questions to do with text analytics. There's also communities set 
up by academics and practitioners to share all of these things, to ask questions, and find 
resources. There's the general AI and machine learning competitions and things like KDnuggets 
and Kaggle. There's, usually, for any large AI platform like WEKA, there'll be a community around 
that. 
For special areas like English language teaching for ICAME I or semantic analysis like SemEval, 
there'll be special interest groups that have competitions. They generally have annual conferences 
and workshops and maybe a journal as an ICAME journal for example. The ACL is the 
professional organization for text analytics professionals and academics. And it's quite a broad 
organization. It does cost money to join I should warn you. 
Although, you can get free membership to access the website. But they like people to pay so you 
can get the journal and access to some of the conferences. The European Union, and to a lesser 
extent the British, EPSRC, the Engineering and Physical Science Research Council, they also try 
to foster communities and have websites for those communities. 
So go out there and join some of these online communities to use them, to get resources, to get 
knowledge which you can then use in your course works in your projects and so on. Thank you 
very much for listening. Hope you enjoy. 
Oh, and if you want to be one of my LinkedIn or Facebook friends-- I stopped using Facebook, I 
have to say-- but you certainly can send me a contact to join in LinkedIn and I'll be very happy to 
LinkedIn to you. OK. Bye for now. 
 
 
© University of Leeds 
 
10 of 10 
 
[END] 
